---
title: "Why I want to use Nix[OS]"
date: 2022-06-03
permalink: 2022-why-nix
---

- I want to make reproducible LaTeX documents. That means not depending on some
  arbitrary installation of TeX Live → hence Nix should be used for the
  `pdftex`/`luatex` engine, `biber`, and all packages. The output of the
  derivation should be the PDF file itself. Also, each git commit should
  correspond to exactly one PDF file → hence Flakes.
- Similarly, I'd like to produce a static site where the source is markdown and
  the output is the html version of the site. Again one commit goes to one html.
- I'd like to use Home Manager for dotfiles *and programs and plugins and
  utilities* rather than yadm.
    - Also declarative Firefox configuration.
    - base16 and/or Stylix theming.
- I'd like to get a similar configuration going in a NixOS installation on a
  laptop, and in a nix-on-ubuntu installation (a lá nix-darwin).
- Run some simple things like PiHole and Syncthing on a Raspberry Pi or low
  power home server. The services should use a reverse proxy like nginx. (See
  nixclout-webservices).
  - Main things
      - The server should run NixOS.
      - It should be Flaky since each commit should correspond to exactly one
        generation. (There shouldn't be a concept of a rollback, instead
        checkout the earlier commit and rebuild to get back to the old config.
        It's deterministic, after all.)
      - The server should be immutable (erase your darlings). I.e., running a
        rebuild and rebooting should end up in the same state as completely
        wiping and reinstalling and building the latest commit.
      - It should be handled remotely, e.g. with NixOps or deploy-rs.
  - Bonus things
    - I should be able to test in a VM and get the exact same result as
      rebuilding on the Pi.
    - I should be able to make a test suit whereby a VM with the latest build
      is spun up and a serise of tests are run. Following the above the tests
      should give the exact same result upon deploying to the Pi.
    - The server should automatically manage security updates. (e.g. auto-update
      versions in flake lockfile, commit change to a specific auto-update
      branch, and then rebuild.)
      - https://discourse.nixos.org/t/flakes-and-autoupgrade/12994/2
    - Given that I know the exact system that the server will be running on
      (e.g. exact raspberry pi model, network configuration, and system drive
      (or SD card)), I should be able to generate a fresh installation and put
      it straight on a usb drive / SD card, plug it in, boot, and have a working
      system.
    - It should be possible to run services direct on the host or inside a
      container. Many (but not necessarily all) services should be inside a
      container to make the interface more explicit (e.g. this specific host
      folder is mounted inside the container, and these specific ports are
      exposed). (Potentially also some security benefits.)
    - When deploying to the Pi it should also be possible to simultaneously
      deploy services (ideally entire NixOS) to a remote cloud host that could
      be used as a bastion server.
  - Doubly bonus things
    - I should be able to make a bunch of self-hosted services that I can run
      from my Pi, but when my Pi breaks I should be able to run those same
      services from a container or VM on my laptop and everything should *just
      work*.
    - I'd like to have some kind of GUI configuration tool to change options in
      the self-hosted services that can be used by my family members without
      much difficulty. I've been looking at web-based editors based on JSON
      Schema.
